---
layout: post
title: "extend your brain"
date: 2012-09-14 09:14
comments: true
categories: 
---
It was 54 paces from the school entrance to my second grade classroom. What was the outcome of that design meeting last week? I am sometimes astonished by the insignificant things I remember. More often, I’m frustrated by the useful things I don’t. I know that the information was once accessible, and maybe it is still buried in my brain somewhere, indefinitely marooned. It’s as if my brain has surreptitiously implemented a self-sabotaging eviction policy.

We can rebuild it. We have the technology. Well, maybe not yet; but we can extend it. Private indexing services such as evernote give us the ability to release the floodgates of information, providing an intuitive interface for future access. I had a brief fling with evernote a few years back. It didn’t work out. Reflecting on that experience, I believe this is because I was so hesitant to expose and relinquish control of my ideas and experiences. Perhaps I was attributing some of my self-worth to my ability to recall anything and everything.

This time, I began with a multi-hour brain dump of everything I could think of. Project ideas, to-do lists, algorithms, birthdays, design patterns, bookmarks, questions, recent meetings, books I’ve read, books I want to read, everything. This was a painful process, but rewards immediately began rolling in as my second brain came to life — accessible via a few keystrokes (or finger-taps). It now grows as my real brain grows. It accumulates important emails, insightful blog articles, meeting notes, route details of mountains I’d like to climb, funny quotes from friends and strangers — pretty much everything I think might ever be worth recalling. It has even instilled new habits. Literature that I feel I’ve taken something meaningful from, I read twice. First, a quick read getting a big picture of the content. Then a much closer read, while taking summarizing notes.

Things are going much better now. My mind feels clear and lean. My resumed command over my past thoughts and experiences leaves me optimistic about my ability to face any challenge.

There are many who lament and object to this application of technology, but it is nothing new. Nostalgia and pride are an expected hurdle in the adoption of technology that (better) performs human tasks. Plato lamented the advent of the written word: “If men learn this, it will implant forgetfulness in their souls; they will cease to exercise memory because they rely on that which is written, calling things to remembrance no longer from within themselves, but by means of external marks. What you have discovered is a recipe not for memory, but for reminder. And it is no true wisdom that you offer your disciples, but only its semblance, for by telling them of many things without teaching them you will make them seem to know much, while for the most part they know nothing, and as men filled, not with wisdom, but with the conceit of wisdom, they will be a burden to their fellows.” How is it that we can possibly know the thoughts that resided in the brain of a man who died over 2,000 years ago? Oh yah, he wrote them down.